Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

GEOPHYSICS, VOL. 63, NO. 4 (JULY-AUGUST 1998); P. 1213-1224, 14 FIGS.

Avoiding pitfalls in shallow seismic reflection surveys

Don W. Steeples* and Richard D. Miller!

 

ABSTRACT

Acquiring shallow reflection data requires the use
of high frequencies, preferably accompanied by broad
bandwidths. Problems that sometimes arise with this
type of seismic information include spatial aliasing of
ground roll, erroneous interpretation of processed air-
waves and air-coupled waves as reflected seismic waves,
misinterpretation of refractions as reflections on stacked
common-midpoint (CMP) sections, and emergence of
processing artifacts. Processing and interpreting near-
surface reflection data correctly often requires more than
a simple scaling-down of the methods used in oil and
gas exploration or crustal studies. For example, even un-
der favorable conditions, separating shallow reflections
from shallow refractions during processing may prove
difficult, if not impossible. Artifacts emanating from in-
adequate velocity analysis and inaccurate static correc-
tions during processing are at least as troublesome when
they emerge on shallow reflection sections as they are
on sections typical of petroleum exploration. Conse-
quently, when using shallow seismic reflection, an inter-
preter must be exceptionally careful not to misinterpret
as reflections those many coherent waves that may ap-
pear to be reflections but are not. Evaluating the validity
of a processed, shallow seismic reflection section there-
fore requires that the interpreter have access to at least
one field record and, ideally, to copies of one or more
of the intermediate processing steps to corroborate the
interpretation and to monitor for artifacts introduced by
digital processing.

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION

Problems in collecting, processing, and interpreting seismic
data can impede the practical implementation of near-surface,
common-midpoint (CMP), seismic reflection techniques, also
known as common depth-point (CDP) methods. However,

when used correctly, these same methods can be very effec-
tive in analyzing the geology of the near surface.

Detecting shallow reflectors requires the use of high frequen-
cies, a fact first recognized by Evison (1952). For example, when
a synthetic 100-Hz source wavelet is introduced into a 10-m-
thick layer over a half-space, the first arrival separates nicely
from the reflection at geophone offsets of less than 5 m (Fig-
ure 1). However, when a 40-Hz dominant-frequency wavelet is
used, interference between the first arrival and the reflection
wavelet occurs at all offsets, including zero. Consequently, we
can obtain the desired shallow reflection result only when we
use high frequencies, no matter what the bandwidth. Based on
this finding and on the fact that clean Ricker wavelets do not
occur in real data, any event occurring earlier than ~25 ms
on a stacked section having a dominant frequency of less than
~100 Hz cannot be considered an uncontaminated reflection.

Other problems, which we collectively term “pitfalls,” in-
volve the spatial aliasing of ground roll, interpreting airwaves
and air-coupled waves as actual seismic waves, incorrectly in-
terpreting refractions as reflections on stacked CMP sections,
and failure to deal with processing artifacts. Examples of these
pitfalls are grouped into sections dealing with the collection,
processing, and interpretation of near-surface data, along with
recommendations for either diagnosing and rectifying or avoid-
ing the problems in each of these areas.

Data-collection pitfalls

Field testing.—Before a seismic reflection survey is under-
taken at a new site, we recommend that on-site testing be done.
Ideally, a fuil day of walkaway noise testing, a procedure in
which geophones are moved progressively farther from the
shotpoint, should be scheduled at the beginning of a project.
We advocate testing at least two types of seismic sources (eg.,
weight drops, explosives, projectiles, or Vibroseis™) in at least
two sizes (e.g., 12- and 20-lb sledgehammers, 8- and 12-gauge
downhole shotguns) or sweep strategies per source for each
project. Generally, we have found that high-quality, 40-Hz geo-
phones are adequate for this type of testing. However, at loca-
tions exhibiting dominant frequencies of 400 to 600 Hz, we use
100-Hz geophones.

Manuscript received by the Editor April 25, 1997; revised manuscript received December 1, 1997.
*Dept. of Geology, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66045-2124. E-mail: steeples@kuhub.cc.ukans.edu.
tKansas Geological Survey, 1930 Constant Avenue, Lawrence, Kansas 66047-3726. E-mail: rmiller@kgs.ukans.edu.

© 1998 Society of Exploration Geophysicists. All rights reserved.

1213
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

1214 Steeples and Miller

To some degree, the relative amplitudes of reflections, as
compared to ground roll, are a function of geophone coupling
to the ground. In most circumstances, the best coupling is ob-
tained when geophones mounted on long spikes are planted
firmly in the earth. When the geophones are poorly coupled to
the ground, ground roll is enhanced relative to reflections (see
Hoover and O’Brien, 1980; Krohn, 1984).

For the purposes of walkaway testing, we have found it ad-
visable to begin with geophone station spacings that are about
half those we would expect to use for a production survey at
a given site. At this stage, we also use shot-to-geophone maxi-
mum offsets that are at least 15 times the depth of the primary
target. Normally, we have a general set of parameters in mind
when we arrive at a particular site. However, the results of the
walkaway tests often require us to alter one or more of those
parameters as we begin the production phase of the survey.

When using a seismograph with 16 or fewer bits of analog-
to-digital (A/D) conversion, we have found it advantageous to
have a large selection of pre-A/D filter combinations available
so we can test at least three filter settings for each walkaway
test. When the seismograph has 18 bits or more of A/D conver-
sion, we advise recording shallow reflection data without using
analog, low-cut filters to avoid phase distortion and potential
loss of bandwidth. However, the adequacy of the instantaneous
dynamic range of the seismograph must be the overriding con-
sideration when determining whether pre-A/D, low-cut filters
are to be used. The desired data are lost when seismograph
gain is too low to record at least one or two bits of reflection
information, a situation that may occur when too much low-
frequency surface-wave information is allowed to reach the
A/D converters. Alternatively, when gain is too high and the
data are clipped, reflection data will be recorded ambiguously,
in most cases rendering them useless.

Geophone Offset (m)

24 16 8

. sac

 

Direct

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Co Ba SSF Reflected
— >
50 PP
2 7
=
75
Layer thickness: Om
Layer P-wave velocity: 800 m/s

Half-space velocity: 6000 m/s

Fic. 1. A layer-over-half-space model showing 100-Hz arrivals
for the direct wave only and the primary reflection from a re-
flector at a depth of 10 m. Note the interference that occurs at
distances as small as 5 m from the shotpoint. When the domi-
nant frequency of the data can be increased, the interference
problem can be decreased.

Ground rol].— Usually, ground roll is characterized by low
frequency, low velocity, and high amplitude. Because ground
roll tends to mask reflection signals, it has presented a dilemma,
since the 1920s, for seismologists in pursuit of hydrocarbons.
Classically, the methods used to deal with ground roll are source
and geophone arrays, frequency filtering, f-k filtering, and
stacking. Generally, however, ground roll is less troublesome
during shallow surveys than it is during surveys undertaken
at greater depths. Although we have performed shallow re-
flection surveys at more than 100 sites, including areas charac-
terized by volcanics at or near the surface and locations with
water tables 50 m or more below the surface, we have not yet
encountered a site at which the reflections in the upper 100 ms
did not have a dominant frequency nearly double that of the
ground roll. Although such sites may exist, to date we have not
found any shallow reflections with low dominant frequencies
relative to the dominant frequency of the ground roll. Hence,
we have been able to decrease the amplitude of the ground roll
either by frequency filtering or by using a combination of fre-
quency filtering, spectral balancing, and f-k filtering. Minimiz-
ing ground roll by applying digital filtering presupposes that the
instantaneous dynamic range of the equipment is large enough
to allow the reflected energy to be recorded in the presence of
high-amplitude noise. However, even when using systems fea-
turing quiet electronics and 16 bits or more of A/D conversion,
reflected energy cannot always be recorded successfully. Al-
ternatively, when the reflections can be maintained in the opti-
mum window (Hunter et al., 1984), ground roll can be removed
by surgical muting.

When data frequency is too low for shallow reflections.—In
shallow surveying, a lower limit of acceptable reflection fre-
quencies exists, based on seismic velocity and target depth. Of-
ten, this limit can be determined by using forward modeling, as
shown in Figure 1, or by making some simple calculations. For
example, assume you are trying to record shallow reflections
at a time of 25 ms with a field situation that produces 40-Hz
dominant-frequency wavelets. Assume further that the first ar-
rival comes in at 5 ms on the nearest field-file trace, which would
not be uncommon in a survey so near the surface. Note that,
in this example, the trailing edge of the first-arrival wavelet
would not disappear until after the 30-ms mark on the near-
offset traces. This results from adding the period of a 40-Hz
wavelet (25 ms) to the 5 ms for the first arrival. Hence, any
energy appearing on the stacked sections with a time of less
than 30 ms would be contaminated by first-arrival waves, Un-
der these circumstances, we would not be able to engender
any useful reflections earlier than 30 ms. Also, the first arrivals
tend to be somewhat ringy, so the 40-Hz dominant-frequency
wavelet specified in the example would interfere even after
30 ms. Hence, a few additional milliseconds must pass before
reflection information can be recorded without interference.

To address the lower frequency limit, we have tried numer-
ous processing techniques, including t-p and f-k filtering, to
separate direct waves and refractions from genuine shallow
reflections. Of these, the only method that appears to work
consistently is to generate and record much higher frequencies
than those commonly used in reflection surveys involving the
deeper regions. At some locations, we have not been able to
work at frequencies high enough to separate shallow reflections
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

Shallow Reflection Pitfalls 1215

from refractions and direct waves. In such cases, the seismic re-
flection method must be considered inappropriate in its present
stage of development.

Spatial and temporal aliasing —Aliasing occurs when data
are not sampled often enough in time or space. For example,
the buggy wheels that we sometimes see in Western movies fre-
quently appear to be turning backward, even though we know
they are moving forward. This phenomenon occurs because a
movie camera is not designed to sample the viewing field of-
ten enough to represent what is happening in reality. Similarly,
when the seismic wavefield is not sampled often enough in time,
seismograms may provide a false picture of ground motion.

Modern engineering seismographs have been designed to
circumvent temporal aliasing by means of antialias, high-cut
filters installed at the factory. Some of these scismographs au-
tomatically select and activate an appropriate antialiasing fil-
ter before any data are recorded. Others require adjusting the
seismograph manually each time the sampling rate is changed.
The problems inherent in temporal aliasing and the solutions
to them are generally well known to those in the fields of seis-
mology and digital signal processing (e.g., Yilmaz, 1987), so we
will not address them here.

Spatial aliasing issues, in which data are not sampled fre-
quently enough in space, are less familiar. One example of
spatially aliased shallow seismic data appears in Steeples and
Miller (1990), and another is presented in Figure 2. Despite

Manson, lowa, Shot Gather

source-to-receiver offset (m)

wo

So

So
|

time (ms)

600

 

 

 

 

Fic. 2. Spatially aliased ground roll from the Manson impact
structure, Iowa. Note the coherency of the ground roll with
apparent moveout in the opposite direction from that of the
first arrival. Note also that the air blast is spatially aliased (data
from Keiswetter, 1995).

a geophone group interval of 5 m, the ground roll is spatially
aliased, as shown by the apparent phase velocity of the ground
rollin a direction opposite to that of the first arrivals. Over the
past decade, the authors have had the opportunity to observe
the spatial aliasing of ground roll at several sites. In theory, a
seismologist might use spatially aliased data—conceivably con-
structing an entire survey around them—only to wonder why
the “reflector” disappears during processing or, worse, why
the interpretation of the data is inconsistent with the results
of drilling. In fact, we are aware of one incident in which a
geophysical contractor plotted aliased, common-offset ground
roll as though it were an interpretable reflection. To help avoid
such pitfalls, we have developed these strategies:

1) When a coherent event on a field-file seismogram is a
true reflector, moving the shotpoint a major fraction of
one geophone interval closer to (or farther away from)
the geophone spread will have little effect on the appear-
ance of the reflector. However, when the coherent event
is the spatial aliasing of ground roll, the effect is often
substantial. Figure 3 illustrates a case in which moving
the shotpoint by only 1 m affected the seismogram sub-
stantially. The events observed at 120 and 160 ms initially
appeared to be reflections. However, when the shotpoint
was moved, a substantial change in the seismogram re-
sulted, thus removing the coherency of both events,

2) Decreasing the geophone interval by a substantial
amount, such as a factor of two or three, will improve
the coherency of a true reflector but will destroy that of
spatially aliased ground roll.

3) When additional geologic or geophysical information is
available from a site (e.g., uphole traveltime, depth to
bedrock, acoustic or other geophysical logs), a pocket
calculator program (Steeples and Miller, 1990) used to
calculate a least-squares-fit hyperbola to a set of T- and
X-points measured directly from a field-file seismogram
may provide some assistance in assessing whether a sus-
pected reflection is genuine.

4) Energy reflected from layers near the surface should have
a frequency content close to that of the direct wave and
the early refracted arrivals on the field files. When the ob-
served reflection frequencies on field files, common-offset
sections, or CMP sections are considerably lower than
those of the first arrivals, the recorded events are likely
to be caused by ground roll rather than by reflections.

Data processing pitfalls

Air-coupled waves——Most seismic sources emit air-blast
noise that can be heard by a bystander. When this noise couples
to the ground or to geophones planted in the ground, the emis-
sions are termed air-coupled waves. Collectively, such waves
are known as airwaves. Airwaves can cause enormous prob-
lems during the processing of shallow reflection data. Our ex-
perience has been that when low-cut filters (either analog or
digital) of 200 Hz or higher are used, airwaves commonly show
a dominant frequency near that of the lower band edge of the
low-cut filter used to refine the data. When low-cut filtering is
minimal, the dominant frequency of the airwaves is often in the
range of 150 Hz or higher. Simple frequency filtering does little
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

1216 Steeples and Miller

to attenuate airwaves within the frequency range of reflected
energy. Therefore, we prefer to use a surgical muting window to
remove airwaves. The recorded air blast usually exhibits some
energy at frequencies between 200 and 500 Hz, so these waves
are likely to be spatially aliased unless the geophone interval
is substantially less than 1 m. Because of spatial aliasing, f-k
filtering must be used with caution to avoid enhancing those
components of the air-coupled waves that could stack coher-
ently on CMP sections. In most cases air-coupled waves last
several cycles, which causes a portion of the high-frequency
wave to fall outside the mute window in f-k space. These parts
of the airwave may stack coherently at velocities that are rea-
sonable for near-surface materials. The problem becomes more
dramatic when data are scaled or trace-balanced after filtering.

Figure 4 provides an example of a CMP scismic section ex-
hibiting what appear to be coherent reflections at 60 to 70 ms.
These are not truc reflections but are stacked air blast. Figure 5
is an example of an air-blast echo from the recording truck
superimposed on an intra-alluvial reflection. Note that the po-
sition of the diffraction-like pattern changed when the record-
ing truck was moved.

In one high-resolution seismic reflection survey of which we
are aware, about a dozen “reflections” were observed on a
section that had been processed by expcricnecd professionals.
However, close inspection later revealed that all of the “re-
flections” had a dominant period of about 9 ms, from times
of 80 ms to 600 ms. Furthermore, these apparent reflections
had the highest S/N ratio where the CMP fold was smallest.
The S/N ratio of reflections on CMP-stacked sections should
increase proportionally to the square root of the fold rather
than decrease with increasing fold. So, when the data were re-
processed with appropriate surgical muting of the air blast, no
usable reflections were found. Indeed, it became evident that
the entire geologic interpretation was based on the CMP stack-
ing of air blast, complete with sand lenses whose presence was
by chance supported by the drilling data.

Refractions.—Separating shallow reflections from shallow
refractions on ficld files prior to or during processing is of-

ten a formidable task. We know that energy reflected near the
surface tends to have a frequency content close to that of the
direct wave and the early refracted arrivals on field files. As a
result, reflections cannot be separated easily from refractions
by means of frequency filtering. Moreover, wide-angle shallow
reflections and shallow refractions have very similar phase ve-
locities, and they may interfere with each other—destructively
or constructively—over a large range of geophone offsets. Con-
sequently, using f-k filtering to separate overlapping events
having similar phase velocitics is ineffective because of the
side-lobe effects of the filtcrs.

Distinguishing refractions from reflections on field files can
be difficult, but separating shallow reflections unequivocally
from shallow refractions on processed sections without refcr-
ring to the field files is nearly impossible. Even so, one useful
indicator on a processed scismic section is frequency inversion
with depth. Figure 6 is an cxample of stacked refractions that
have an apparent frequency lower than that of the underlying
reflections. Under normal geologic conditions, the frequency
of the reflections on a shallow reflection seismogram will de-
crease with depth as a result of attenuation with increasing
travelpath length. When the apparent frequency of the coher-
ent events changes from low at short reflection times to high at
longer times, shallow refractions may have been stacked into
the data. Another possibility is that high-frequency airwaves
have stacked coherently at the longer times.

In a CMP processing scheme, the configuration of a
reflection-time display will be transformed from a hyperbola
to a straight line during NMO correction. True shallow reflec-
tions typically losc 20-30% of their high-frequency information
during this process because of NMO stretch (Miller, 1992). Re-
fractions are stretched by a similar amount. Yet refractions at
close offsets that arrive linearly do not respond in-phase to
a hyperbolic transformation; thus, the misalignment of indi-
vidual wavelets present during CMP stacking may drastically
reduce their apparent dominant frequency. To illustrate this
point, Figure 7 presents a low-frequency refraction between 20
and 40 ms that was allowed to remain in the data throughout
the stacking process.

source-to-receiver offset (m)

time (ms)

 

 

“sme SOatially aliased ground roll

Fic. 3. Possible reflections observable at 120 and 170 ms in the field file on the left disappear when the sledge-
hammer shotpoint is moved only 1 m. Geophone plants and other parameters are the same in the field file on
the right, except that the sledgehammer source was moved 1 m farther from the line. The apparent reflections in
the field file on the left are spatially aliased ground roll. (Data collected near London, England, by R. Huggins,

R. Miller, and D. Steeples, 1989.)
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

Shallow Reflection Pitfalls

1217

 

 

 

time (s)

 

 

Fic. 4. Air blast appearing on stacked sections from Heber City, Utah, 12-fold CDP data. The coherent event at times between 60
and 70 ms is air blast (from Steeples and Miller, 1990).

Common Depth Points

 

Time (sec)

 

220 240 280
T T T

rw
Pb

d)>} ;
ELV DDD Ma Pond pp. Dppb.
: > my P ap ms») Mhyooak

re RE ap ) Rasterites dg
,

HP , ; ae
a 1 Por, aD so} Poona PD i

 

> Wael po
oye

Sm

 

my
rel bT moset
ki He 3

1 1 yet et L
60 100 140 180

Distance (ft)

220

Fic. 5. An intra-alluvial reflection from the Blue River Valley, Kansas, showing the effect of improper first-arrival mute on a 12-fold
CDP stack with air-blast echo from a recording truck at CDPs of 246 and 298. ‘The air-blast echo could be mistaken for a diffraction.
In reality, the truck was moved from one location to another as the survey progressed. Problems resulting from air blast that stacks
constructively occur in many cases (from Steeples and Miller, 1990).
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

1218 Steeples and Miller

 

 

 

 

time (sec)

‘i

ye

 

Devan spe
THARP RAPES ALR ARR a

Low-Cut Filter (pre A/D): 220 Hz

Fic. 6. An example of the effect of allowing first arrivals to remain in seismic reflection data. Energy arriving at times of less than
40 ms is primarily refraction energy. Note the lower apparent frequency and the apparent dip. The true reflections at times between
50 and 100 ms show higher frequency and a flat structure. The scale distance of 40 ft corresponds to about 12 m (from Steeples and
Miller, 1990).

 

Velocity Panels (m/s)
1800 2100 2800 2700 3000
| | | |
17 Ty TO TOL

uae

 

re oh

) on i ce

SN pie Sy

   

2s ERKE Peer

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ye Be) ‘ . y Oy oa ,
: ae me x ¥
, ys 6 oe rd % 9) pol
— ps > , r ee bs Ese Pet >
2 ao eee a ; Wess Sain
w 200 7 poe a
a ent
”
a =
c ‘
400 - SA PNP
0 2am
Di]

Fic. 7. Stacked velocity panels in which the first-arrival wavelets were left in the data on purpose to illustrate stacking of refractions.
Velocity analysis reveals coherency at different depths for different stacking velocities. Hence, the interpretation could depend upon
which velocity the processor used.
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

Shallow Reflection Pitfalls 1219

So far, our discussion of refractions has involved fiat-lying
layers only. Figure 8 is an example of improperly muted refrac-
tions in a data set that mcludes dipping layers near the surface.
As the survey progressed downdip, the depth to the refractors
and the associated critical-offset refraction distance increased.
At some point, the geophones were no longer farther than the
critical-offset distance and the refractions disappeared. Mean-
while, signal from a shallower refractor was picked up by the
geophones, and the refraction data stacked coherently for some
distance along the line as the process repeated itself. The ef-
fect was a shingled appearance of the seismic record, with
the stacked refractors resembling successive layers of roofing
shingles.

Although misidentifying a refraction as a reflection is a com-
mon pitfall, the opposite mistake can be made as well, i.e., a
genume refiection may be discarded simply because it looks
like a refraction. One way to avoid such an error is to make
time-distance measurements using a field-file record and to
solve the problem as though the arrival in question were a
refraction. This can be accomplished by measuring the veloc-
ities and intercept times of the direct-wave first arrivals and
the refraction/refiection in question. These measurements can
then be introduced into the basic refraction equations for one
layer over a half-space and solved for critical offset distance.
If an essential contradiction develops, i.e., if the critical off-
set distance is much greater than the offset distance at which
the phase is observed, a reflection is likely because a refrac-
tion cannot occur at distances smaller than the critical distance.
When two or more layers are present over a half-space, mul-
tilayer refraction calculations can be used to observe whether
an essential contradiction develops in the refraction assump-
tion. An additional aid to resolving the refiection/refraction
quandary emerges when the apparent structure of a stacked
section closely resembles the topography of the surface. Al-
though such mimicking is geologically possible, it may suggest
the presence of refractions, erroneous static corrections, or an
incorrect near-surface velocity model.

For quality control, the data may be processed with the direct
waves and the refractions left intact within the data set so the
processor can see where they emerge and what effect they may
have on the processed sections. The results then can be used

0-

time (sec)
_
I

2-

 

as a diagnostic tool to make certain that refractions, or their
vestiges, are not present on the final processed section to which
surgical muting has been applied. The refracted arrivals can be
muted carefully, field file by field file, during the early stages
of processing to reduce the likelihood of their stacking on the
section. Sometimes only a small percentage of field records will
show unusually good reflections, but these records can be used
to correlate to the processed seismic sections.

Perhaps unfortunately, the geologic conclusions reached by
assuming that an event on a stacked section is a reflection may
approximate the true geology even when the event is a re-
fraction. Greater depth to a velocity discontinuity leads to in-
creased refractor intercept times and increased two-way reflec-
tion times; hence, the stacking of refraction arrivals with CMP
refiection software can sometimes lead to a correct geologic in-
terpretation based on either an incorrect or an inappropriate
geophysical analysis. Indeed, one of the principal limitations of
the shallow seismic refiection method continues to be its inabil-
ity to separate, with certainty, shallow reflections from shallow
refractions and guided waves.

Processing artifacts.—Artifacts that arise from inadequate
velocity analysis, inaccurate static corrections, or inappropri-
ate processing are at least as troublesome when they appear
on shallow reflection sections as they are when they occur in
deeper petroleum exploration reflection surveys. The deconvo-
lution of shallow reflection data often, but not always, degrades
the quality of the reflections. Usually, one or more of the the-
oretical assumptions underlying deconvolution (Yilmaz, 1987)
is violated when dealing with shallow data. First, the high-
frequency components of the source wavelet often change sub-
stantially as near-surface conditions change. Consequently, the
source wavelet may change with horizontal location, which
violates one of the main assumptions of spiking deconvolu-
tion. Second, the frequency of shallow refiections often varies
rapidly with depth in the earth, a problem that can be ad-
dressed at least partially by using time-varying deconvolution.
Third, shallow refiection data commonly show too few refiec-
tive horizons (sometimes only one or two) to represent a ran-
dom refiectivity series, which is one of the primary assump-
tions of statistics-based deconvolution methods. Finally, the

15m

Fic. 8. An example of refractions stacking constructively when first arrivals were muted improperly. Note the shingled appearance
of the coherent events between 70 and 100 m/s. This represents improperly muted refractions in a dipping environment. As the
refractors dipped below the surface, their critical distance became greater than the farthest geophone offsets. Consequently, the
events die out at times greater than 100 m/s on the stacked sections. In dipping environments, such shingling is diagnostic of

refractions on stacked “reflection” sections.
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

1220 Steeples and Miller

S/N ratio of shallow reflection data sets is notoriously poor,
a condition exacerbated by the use of deconvolution (House
et al., 1996).

Using an f-k filter or other filtermg procedure does not
remove refractions, ground roll, or air waves; it merely sup-
presses some of their characteristics. When reflection informa-
tion is not present in the scismic data, the vestiges of refrac-
tions, ground roll, and airwaves that invariably remain in the
data after filtering, as well as artifacts from wraparound and
bandwidth problems, may process smoothly into events that
look like reflections, Searching for reflections in some of the
raw field files or on frequency-filtered field files is therefore
imperative; otherwise, we cannot know with certainty that the
data contain legitimate seismic reflections. In every successful
shallow reflection survey with which we have been involved,
a convincing reflection gleaned from at least one field file or
one CMP gather by simple scaling and/or frequency filtering
has been identified.

The use of f-é filtering and deconvolution together can gen-
erate processing artifacts. Additionally, the disturbance within
a data set may be widespread as a result of faulty electron-
ics or other sources of noise, such as lightning. For example, a
single electronic noise pulse on one 48-channel record can con-
taminate 48 bins of a CMP sort. When a data set shows spiky
noise on several traces or shots, the deconvolution operator
is inverted at the base of its window and scaled proportion-
ally to the amplitude of the spike. The f-é filter process can
spread this contamination to other traces via its trace-mixing
characteristics. To test whether a data set has this problem, the
operator’s window length can be varied up and down by a fac-
tor of two or three. Theoretically, the deconvolution operation
should be most sensitive to reflection wavelets within the auto-
correlation window. When the wavelet moves more than a few
milliseconds, it is almost certainly a processing artifact rather
than a reflector. To continue with our 48-channel, noise-pulse
example, a single spike occurring on all traces of a 48-channel
record can emerge on a CMP-processed section as a coher-
ent feature 48 traces wide that has the attributes of the filter
operators used during processing.

Another type of data contamination resulting from filter op-
erators occurs when clipped data are processed. Clipping can
occur inside the geophones, in the seismograph itself, or during
processing. In this type of contamination, an artificial, high-

0-

time (sec)
_
I

27

frequency content is introduced into the data at the comers
of the clipped wavelets. Any subsequent filtering operations
will duplicate the filter operator at time samples representing
clipped corners. When the resulting filter-operator wavelets in
the data happen to stack coherently, they can be (and have
been) misinterpreted as reflections.

A processor’s choice of automatic gain control (AGC) win-
dow length can have an enormous effect on the way a seismic
section looks. Displaying the data with an AGC window of
20 ms as opposed to 200 ms, for example, may alter the look
of a seismic section substantially, which can lead to a different
set of interpretations. As shown in Figure 9, the AGC window
effect produced a high-amplitude zone on the seismic section
at times greater than 140 ms on the section. A longer AGC
window (of perhaps 150 ms) would have reduced the effect of
amplification of the low-signal zone.

Some processing flows have the potential to produce coher-
ent events that may be interpreted erroneously as reflections.
In addition to those noted previously, residual statics and dip
filters also act as coherency filters. Horizontal stacking, ie., the
mixing or adding of adjacent traces, favors coherency and sets
up the other coherency filters to manufacture what appear to
be reflectors.

When to stop processing —Sometimes the brute-stack stage
is a good point at which to conclude the data do not contain
sufficient reflection energy to merit continuing a project. We
assume that we are dealing with genuine reflections only when
we see hints of their presence on either the frequency-filtered
shot records or on the CMP gathers. In contrast, useful geo-
logic information can be processed into oblivion. For example,
Figure 10 indicates the presence of a small bedrock valley by
the reversal of apparent dip on the bedrock-reflection hyper-
bola at times between 55 and 65 ms. Standard CMP processing
[without dip moveout (DMO) processing, however] obliter-
ated this bedrock valley from the data. In this instance, the
best interpretation would have been achieved by using unpro-
cessed field files.

Data interpretation pitfalls

When the user is confident that both collection and process-
ing pitfalls have been avoided, the geologic interpretation may

 

Fic. 9. In this section, choosing an inappropriate automatic gain control window resulted in a relatively quict zone at times between
90 and 140 ms. The increase in amplitude at 140 ms is not real; it is a vestige of the AGC window, which causes the ground roll

below 140 ms to be plotted at a larger amplitude.
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

Shallow Reflection Pitfalls 1221

begin. Among the main interpretation hazards is the presence
of multiple coherent peaks on a seismic section, which may
or may not indicate two or more individual reflections. An
individual reflector may be represented by one or more peaks,
depending upon the shape and bandwidth of the source wave-
let and on the acoustic impedance contrast at the individual
interfaces.

The wavelets shown in comparisons (Miller et al., 1986, 1992)
of typical near-surface sources result in two dominant peaks for
individual reflections from an interface in which a larger acous-
tic impedance is encountered, depending somewhat upon dis-
play parameters. Conversely, shallow seismic sources typically
produce only one dominant peak per reflector when the sig-
nal is reflected from an interface characterized by a material
having a smaller acoustic impedance,

Deconvolution is not used regularly and is successful only
rarely on shallow seismic reflection sections, thus, the effects
of source wavelets can remain in the data and pose problems
for interpreters. Figure 11 is a schematic of a hypothetical sit-
uation (although perhaps oversimplified) in which three re-
flectors have produced five peaks. Clearly, something must be
known about the shape and bandwidth of the source wavelet
and about the processing history for the data to be interpreted
optimally.

To some extent, interpretation pitfalls can be avoided by
judiciously using synthetic seismograms or, at a minimum, by
using data from borehole check shots. Synthetic seismograms
often can be generated and used to tie reflections to individual
geologic units, provided that some well control information
and geophysical logs are available. This can be of immense
help during a geologic interpretation, which in most cases must

ideal actual
0 0

SUrfaca

<— time

 

Fic. 11. A hypothetical geologic, acoustic-impedance, and syn-
thctic-scismogram model showing reversed polarity at the sec-
ond reflective interface. In such a case, shallow reflection data
commonly produce five peaks for only three interfaces.

CDP LOCATIONS
12 meters

=-92Z0!—--92Z01

time (sec)

Wh)!
i

|!

 

{
j
|

 

AI
Wath Nyy
ny Wh hy)

i {

\HH
NUIT,

-960! —-—9601

y
ip
iy \
pil AN ae) AND
WN HL EY! My
Whi) Wit i} wh} i)
oli! Ht Mh ‘yt |

Fic. 10. Bedrock vallcy interpreted from ficld files. Note the asymmetry of the reflector at times between 55 and 65 ms. At locations
1074 and 1076, the apex of the reflection hyperbola is to the left of the shotpoint, which indicates the updip direction is to the left.
At locations 1096 and 1098, the apex of the reflection hyperbola is to the right of the shotpoint, indicating the updip direction is to
the right. Consequently, we know that a bedrock valley is present within the 12-m horizontal distance between locations 1076 and

1096. This bedrock valley disappeared during processing.
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

1222 Steeples and Miller

be tested by other methods, including corroborative drilling at
critical spots.

Data processing pitfalls and interpretation problems are not
unrelated. For example, an interpretation can depend heavily
on the velocity function used. Figures 12 and 13 (Steeples and
Miller, 1990) show how a refined velocity function can affect
interpretation when a small horst has been superimposed on
a gently sloping interface. Figure 14 (Miller, 1992) illustrates
the sensitivity of data quality to small changes in NMO stretch
mute. Note that S/N ratio can be an important variable in the
interpretation of a seismic section.

Incorrect or uncompensated static corrections— Early or de-
layed arrivals of seismic energy, called statics, result from a lat-
erally nonuniform, near-surface velocity or elevation. They are

a problem for both conventional and shallow reflection surveys.
The severity of the problem, however, is much more significant
during shallow surveys when the total static correction is a sig-
nificant fraction of the two-way reflection time. Because the
data contain high frequencies, the static corrections may be
more than the dominant periods of the reflection wavelets.

Managing the statics problem with processing routines can
be attempted with some degree of confidence when a large
number of reflections are present. Unfortunately, the number
of total reflection events on shallow data sets tends to be low,
which sets the stage for the production of artifacts during ef-
forts to compensate for these time irregularities. In fact, corre-
lation statics routines have been quite successful in removing
real structures, generating bogus structures, and producing co-
herent events from noise.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 
  

Time (s)

er pee

 

Ae De oe ee a : e MP me o - 4 rh

! a

a
sh

mt

Di
4 : 1 ae

 

.

   

2 ets seas
bit ma

 

2 ie

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

? va

TET
aes a —

Herein 12 me -
HT eouscutinlt -

 
   

1 ‘ i"

Fic. 12, The effect of incorrect stacking velocity on a shallow reflector. The apparent fault to the right of the center of the seismic
section is not a fault but is the effect of incorrect stacking velocity, Compare with Figure 13, in which a more appropriate velocity

function was used (from Steeples and Miller, 1990).

nmo

Time (s)

 

= 440 m/s

nmo
V = 490 m/s

Vine = 410 m/s

12m
malt

Fic. 13. The same data as those in Figure 12 but with a better ato function. No faulting is evident (from Steeples and
Miller, 199
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

Shallow Reflection Pitfalls 1223

Probably the most effective method of correcting shallow re-
flection data for near-surface static irregularities was developed
in association with the optimum-window method of Hunter
et al. (1984). Most static variations originate above the water
table; thus, when a water table reflection can be identified, most
statics can be compensated by flattening the reflection. Unfor-
tunately, in shallow reflection data, we have seen that strong

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

source -to-receiver offset (m) CDP numbers
3.7 18.2 250 270 290
[me
a) (a) J TT
25%
40 4 , 4
gq 07 =
£
@®
£ 8- 4
100 4 ~
0 7] Pe gel
2 ne
g ‘Ty
@®
£ =
. | (c) JJ
i l
40 + 4
gq 0- 7
E
oO
E w- “
100 - -
120 4 =
0 7m 0 3m
Li Li
distance distance

Fic. 14. The first-arrival stretch mute is not a particularly im-
portant parameter in deep-reflection surveying. In near-surface
surveys, however, it can be significant (data from Miller, 1992).

water table reflections are not common. This leaves refraction
statics, common-offset statics, or correlation statics routines as
options.

Correlation statics routines are widely used, but they are also
very susceptible to the generation of artifacts. The main source
of error comes from excessive allowable shifts. As the domi-
nant frequency of the reflection wavelet increases, the amount
of shift that can be applied without skipping a cycle decreases.
For example, consider a reflection-time event at 40 ms having
2 ms of static relative to adjacent traces. This static represents
1/5 A of a 100-Hz reflection; but if the dominant frequency is
500 Hz, it will be a full-wavelength static. Depending on the
bandwidth of the reflection wavelet, it is very unlikely that this
static can be managed with correlation statics routines alone.
Limiting the maximum allowable static shift in correlation stat-
ics routines to one-quarter of the dominant wavelet period
and ensuring that at least two (and preferably more) reflection
events are within the correlation window minimizes the chance
of gencrating static artifacts. Clearly, maximizing frequency is
our ultimate goal; but regardless of how static correction is ac-
complished, compensating for actual static anomalies becomes
more difficult as frequency increases.

Low fold on some geophones.—Sometimes recording ge-
ometry, optimum recording window, and depth to reflector can
combine in such a way that the multiplicity or CMP fold on the
processed data can vary greatly with time within a particular
seismic section. When the midpointis the same for 12 offset dis-
tances, for example, a stack is referred to as 12-fold. But when
a shallow reflector exists under low-fold circumstances and full
fold is 12, calling the data for the whole section “12-fold” could
be misleading.

In some cases, the fold level may drop so much that the data
we see on the shallowest parts of a section may be equivalent
to those we see on a common-offset section. When the S/N
ratio is sufficiently high, plotting common-offset sections with
and without NMO corrections for one or more of the near-trace
offsets can be advantageous following the application of statics
and filtering. Determining whether any of the common-offset
sections resembles the final stacked section can be helpful when
interpreting CMP sections. Pullan and Hunter (1985) show that
substantial distortion of the reflected wavelet can occur at wide
incidence angles with shallow reflections, The common-offset
sections from one or more of the closer offsets may provide
important information about reflected wavelets that have not
been distorted by NMO corrections or by wide angles of inci-
dence. Care should be taken that close-offset, single traces are
not corrupted by overfiltering, which can produce what appear
to be high-frequency reflection wavelets.

CONCLUSIONS

Shallow seismic reflection has reached animportant juncture
as a potentially practicable and reliable method of profiling the
near surface of the earth. The real cost per channel of the mod-
ern seismograph has decreased strikingly in recent years, as has
the cost of related data processing hardware and software. An
increase in the accessibility of these items has produced a con-
comitant increase in interest in the shallow seismic reflection
profiling method, with many new environmental and geophys-
ical applications being developed as a result. However, all too
Downloaded 09/21/13 to 128.113.26.88. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright; see Terms of Use at http://library.seg.org/

1224 Steeples and Miller

often projects succumb to one or more of the pitfalls discussed
here, thus damaging the overall reputation of the technique.

As aresult, practitioners of the method must be knowledge-
able in both theory and practice when applying shallow seismic
techniques and must be exceptionally careful not to misinter-
pret as reflections the many coherent waves that are not reflec-
tions. This is particularly true of the types of wave coherencies
that develop during or that can be enhanced by digital process-
ing, Some of the pitfalls an interpreter may face when dealing
with near-surface data include the spatial aliasing of ground
roll, interpreting processed airwaves as reflected seismic waves,
misinterpreting refractions as reflections on stacked CMP sec-
tions, and failing to recognize processing artifacts. Therefore,
particular care must be taken during all phases of a project,
which inciudes planning and modeling as well as data collec-
tion, processing, and interpretation. Finally, to validate their
conclusions, interpreters must have access to at least one field
file, along with display copies of one or more of the intermedi-
ate processing steps whenever possible.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Reviews by Susan Pullan, Brad Carr, and Joel Watkins
greatly helped the focus and readability of this paper. Edi-
torial assistance by Lee Blackledge during several drafts and
preparation of figures by Pat Acker are greatly appreciated.

REFERENCES

Evison, F. F., 1952, The inadequacy of the standard seismic techniques
for shallow surveying: Geophysics, 17, 867-875.

Hoover, G. M., and O’Brien, J. T., 1980, The influence of the planted
geophone on seismic land data: Geophysics, 45, 1239-1253.

House, J. R., Boyd, T. M., and Haeni, F. P,, 1996, Haddam Meadows,
CT: A case study for the acquisilion, processing, and relevance of
3-D seismic data as applied to the remediation of DNAPL contam-
ination, in Weimer, P, and Davis, T. L., Eds., Applications of 3-D
seismic data to exploration and production: AAPG Studies in Ge-
ology 42, Am. Assn. Petr. Geol., 257-265.

Hunter, J. A., Pullan, S. E., Burns, R. A., Gagne, R. M., and Good,
R. S,, 1984, Shallow seismic reflection mapping of the overburden-
bedrock interface with the engineering seismograph—some simple
techniques: Geophysics, 49, 1381-1385.

Keiswetter, D. A., 1995, Seismic reflection analysis of the Manson im-
pact structure, Towa: Ph. D. dissertation, Univ. of Kansas.

Krohn, C. E., 1984, Geophone ground coupling: Geophysics, 49, 722-
731.

Miller, R. D., 1992, Normal moveout stretch mute on shallow-reflection
data: Geophysics, $7, 1502-1507.

Miller, R. D., Pullan, S. E., Steeples, D, W., and Hunter, J. A., 1992,
Field comparison of shallow seismic sources near Chino, California:
Geophysics, 57, 693-709.

Miller, R. D., Pullan, S. E., Waldner, J. S., and Haeni, F. P,, 1986, Field
comparison of shallow seismic sources: Geophysics, 5L 3067-2092.

Pullan, S. E., and Hunter, J. A., 1985, Seismic model studies of the
overburden, bedrock problem: Geophysics, 50, 1684-1688.

Steeples, D. W., and Miller, R. D., 1990, Seismic-reflection methods
applied to engineering, environmental, and ground-water problems,
in Ward, S., Ed., Review and tutorial: Investigations in geophysics 5,
Soc. Expl, Geophys., 1-30.

Yilmaz, O., 1987, Reismic data processing: Investigations in geophysics
2, Soc. Expl. Geophys.
